Keshi Yena
by Simon Christiansen
“CHEESE” said the sign outside the store. Martin hadn’t been thinking about cheese when he went
out for a walk, but why not?
The doorbell rang as he stepped inside. “Give me a goat cheese,” he said to the clerk. “The
strongest goat cheese you have!”
“Why goat cheese?” asked the clerk; a tall lanky man with curly light-blond hair. “We have
many other fine cheeses. You can try them if you want.”
Our hero considered the question but couldn’t think of an answer. “I’m not quite sure,” he
admitted. “I had this sudden craving for goat cheese, as I walked by and saw your sign. I don’t
think I’ve ever had it before. It’s pretty strange.”
The tall lanky guy with the curly light-blond hair shrugged. “If you’ve never had it, you
should give it a chance. You can’t know what cheese you like best until you’ve tried them all.”
“Is that why you got a job at a cheese store?”
“No, I took the job to share this knowledge with others. And to pay my way through college.
I’m majoring in aerospace engineering. Here is your cheese.” He pushed a package across the
counter.
#
“I’m home, Linda!” he yelled, as he stepped through the door.
“What’s that under your arm?” asked Linda. “I thought you were going for a walk?”
“It’s cheese! The strongest goat cheese they had. I visited the cheese store down at the corner.
Did you ever notice that one?”
“No.”
“Me neither, but it’s there. I think their cheese is good.”
“I didn’t realize you were such a cheese connoisseur.”
He put the package down on the dinner table. “I’m usually not, but I never realized how many
different cheeses there are. I’ll give it a shot, anyway.”
“Don’t ruin your appetite. You promised to cook.”
In the kitchen, he unwrapped the cheese. White and creamy. He applied a layer to a slice of
bread, took a bite, and opened his eyes wide. This was different than the bland stuff they sold in
Aldi. A strong salty flavor, awakening his taste buds.
“You have to taste this, honey”. He placed a plate with goat cheese sandwiches in front of
Linda. She turned up her nose but took a bite anyway. “Yuck! Sorry, but I’m not into salty stuff
like that. You can keep it. Haven’t you started on dinner yet? It’s half past five already.”
“Ok, ok, I’ll get started.”
He put goat cheese in the pasta sauce.
“Did you put goat cheese in the pasta sauce,” asked Linda.
“Yeah, I thought I would try something new. What do you think?”
“Well, I didn’t like it on bread, and I don’t like it in the pasta sauce either.”
Martin nodded. “You’re right. I liked it on bread, but it doesn’t go well with the sauce.”
#
“Do you have a cheese that goes well with pasta sauce?” he asked, the next morning at the cheese
store. “The goat cheese wasn’t a good fit, that’s for sure.”
The tall lanky guy with the curly light-blond hair was still manning the counter. “Well,
Parmesan is great with pasta sauce. You sprinkle it on top.”
“Honey, where is our cheese grater?” he asked, after returning home.
“What do you need that for? You know it’s my turn to cook today, right? Please tell me you
didn’t buy more cheese.”
He poured a pile of packages onto the dinner table. “I’ve got it all! Both Parmigiano-Reggiano
and Grana Padano.”
“What the hell does that mean?”
“Well…. They’re different types of cheese! We’ll expand our horizons. And they are supposed
to be a perfect fit for pasta sauce.”
“But we are not having pasta today! I’m making Cordon Bleu. And I already bought the
cheese.”
She placed a large yellow brick on the table. Standard supermarket cheese.
“But… We’ve had that cheese a hundred times before.”
“YES! We know it’s good. What’s up with you?”
She kissed him on the cheek. “Sorry, honey. You’ve been acting weird lately. You can go relax
on the couch now, and I’ll cook our dinner.”
He brought the Parmesan with him, put the packages on the couch table, and sat down. When
his turn came, he would make a cheese dish to blow her mind.
#
The next day he entered the cheese store once more, only a few minutes after it opened.
“I need a cheese to blow the mind of my girl,” he told the lanky clerk. “She’s used to boring
supermarket cheeses, so it must be both traditional and exciting. If it’s too special, she won’t touch
it, and if it’s too normal, it makes no difference. And I need to be able to use it in some kind of
dinner dish. Serving raw cheese for dinner won’t make me popular.”
The clerk nodded. “I understand. May I recommend ‘Keshi Yena’, a Caribbean dish consisting
of a large ball of cheese stuffed with spicy meat? I recommend using chicken meat. The cheese is
typically Gouda or Edam, so the dish is not too exotic in the cheesy sense. For dessert, you can 
serve apricots with smoked cheese, wrapped in bacon.”
“Eh… Ok. That sounds great, but I don’t know how to make any of that stuff.”
The clerk’s face lit up with a broad smile. “No worries. I have just what you need.” He reached
beneath the counter and produced a large square book. The front page showed a collage of all the
cheeses in the world. The title: “Cheesecipes”.
“That might be the worst pun I’ve ever seen.”
“Agreed,” said the clerk. “But you shouldn’t judge a book on its cover, much less its title. The
author is not a great titlemonger, but he is a fantastic cheese cook. If you follow the recipes, I can
almost guarantee that your girl will become as big a cheese fan as the two of us.”
“Sold! I’ll take the book, and also give me one of each of the cheeses from the front page. I
don’t want to run out of ingredients.”
The clerk laughed and wrapped one of his curls around his right index finger. “I like you!”
#
That night, he served Keshi Yena. Linda looked for a long time at the large yellow blob on the
plate. He waited for her reaction with bated breath.
“What. On. Earth. Is. That?” asked Linda.
“It’s Keshi Yena,” he said. “A traditional Caribbean dish consisting of a ball of cheese, filled
with-“
“A BALL. You want me to eat a ball? I thought you were making pizza.”
“Yeah, but I was afraid if I told you the truth, you wouldn’t taste it. Come on, give it a try. It’s
fantastic!”
“Really? You’ve had this before?”
“No, but that’s what it says in the book.”
“The book? What book?”
“’Cheesecipes’. It’s a recipe book for cheese dishes. I bought it in the store. Yes, I know the title
is silly, but the recipes all look amazing.”
She rolled her eyes. “Undoubtedly, but I prefer having something I know I like.”
“Come on, taste it. I’m sure you’ll like it.”
Linda folded her hands and looked at the yellow blob, like a surgeon considering a malignant
tumor.
“Where are you going, honey?”
She was heading for the door.
“I’m getting pizza. That’s what we agreed on having.”
The door shut with a barely audible click, and that’s when he knew it was over. She hadn’t
even bothered to slam the door, like she usually did after an argument.
He ate the Keshi Yena by himself.
It was fantastic.
#
The next day, he slammed “Cheesecipes” down on the counter in the cheese store. “I made the
Keshi Yena like you said, and she wouldn’t even touch it! She never even got to see the smoked
cheese bacon apricots!”
The curly-haired clerk shook his head slowly while chewing on a stick of cheese. “I’m afraid
there is little hope for her, then. Culinary compatibility is essential in a long-term relationship.
Without it, there is no reason to bother.”
Martin nodded. “I suppose you’re right, but how do you find the right partner, then?
Cheesedating.com?”
“If only!” said the clerk and laughed. “No, I am afraid the problem goes deeper than that.
There are very few cheese enthusiasts left. Cheesecipes sold less than 500 copies.”
Martin put both his hands on the counter. “Then we must work to reverse this trend.”
The clerk shook his curly-haired head. “I’ve tried, but I think it’s too late. Fewer people visit 
the store every year, purchasing less interesting cheeses. I have decided to try a new strategy. If
people won’t come to the cheese, the cheese must come to them.”
“You mean there are more cheese enthusiasts in other countries?”
“To some degree, yes,” said the clerk, as he unwrapped another cheese stick. “But even in
those places, the trend is the same. No, I have another idea. Let me show you.”
He pushed a button beneath the counter, and the entire back wall of the store descended into
the floor, revealing what appeared to be an empty storage room. Walls of grey concrete enclosing a
concrete floor lit by a lonely naked light bulb hanging from the ceiling. In the center of the room, a
large grey metallic cone emerged from a circular hole in the floor.
A square grey hatch with a white handle adorned the side of the cone.
“Is that what I think it is?” said Martin.
The clerk raised his arms high in the air. “It’s the tip of a rocket ship! I had to expand the
basement to make it fit.”
“Do cheese clerks often build rocket ships?”
“I told you I was majoring in aerospace engineering, remember?”
“Oh, right.”
“Come, let me give you a tour.” The clerk approached the rocket, turned the handle, and the
hatch opened with a faint hissing sound. Blinking lamps attached to disparate control panels filled
the interior with multicolored light. Two white leather swiveling chairs occupied the floor.
From the control room at the top of the rocket, they climbed a metal ladder down to a living
quarter containing two bunks, a sink, two lockers, a wooden chair, a bathroom enclosure, and a
round white table supporting a potted red geranium.
“Room for two,” said the clerk and smiled. “But the best is yet to come.”
The next room was the cheese room.
Shrink-wrapped cheeses of all sizes and sorts covered the shelves circling the walls. He couldn’t even begin to count them. The variety was overwhelming. They should have sent a poet.
“The room below is also a cheese room,” proclaimed the curly-haired clerk.
“Impossible!” said Martin, eyes agape. “Every conceivable type of cheese has to be here.”
The clerk smiled. “You will have many chances to broaden your cheese horizons.”
Martin took a deep breath and relaxed. “Are there any other rooms?”
“Yes, the bottom-most room contains cheese crackers.”
“Ah.”
The clerk took Martin’s hand. “You may have noticed that there are two chairs in the control
room. As we discussed, it’s hard to find partners who share our love of cheese.”
Martin held his breath.
“I want you to come with me,” said the clerk. “Together, we will bring cheese to the cosmos!”
Martin put his other hand on top of the clerk’s. “Of course.”
The climbed the ladders in silence. They sat down in the white leather swiveling chairs,
surrounded by blinking lights. The clerk pushed a button and a rumbling sound seemed to emerge
from all around them, the vibrations from the rocket sending chills down Martin’s spine.
Without thinking, he leaned over the edge of the chair, and their lips met in the space between
them. In the clerk’s saliva, he tasted the salty flavor of goat cheese, the firm texture and mild
creamy moistness of mozzarella, and the rich, buttery softness of Camembert; like a carnal Keshi
Yena with warm tongue filling.
Lift-of.